---
title: What is Bace?
category: Introduction
order: 1
---

_Bace CSS_ is a tiny SCSS framework based on [CUBE CSS](https://cube.fyi/) from [Andy Bell](https://twitter.com/piccalilli_). In essence, it is a _utility-enabled_ and _utility-first_ framework.

## Core principles

Compared to other frameworks, _Bace CSS_ distinguishes itself by focusing on a few core principles:

- **Custom properties**: all configured design tokens are converted into CSS custom properties that can be changed in runtime. In addition, all utility classes point towards these custom properties, instead of using the SCSS variables during compile time.
- **Layout driven**: a lot of the issues we face are all about layout. And CSS is good in layout. _Bace CSS_ offers several standardized layout solutions that can be altered using additional utility classes for these layouts. Many of the layouts are inspired by [Every Layout](https://every-layout.dev/).
- **Browser defaults**: browsers are implementing more and more default features. These are by default more accessible and usable for users, compared to solutions created by ourselves.
- **Have a good starting point**: _Bace CSS_ is opinionated. It applies a minimal [CSS reset](https://github.com/kevtiq/bace-css/blob/main/src/_reset.scss) and sets some default [design tokens](/tokens). The default tokens can be overwritten, the rest not.

## What about CSS blocks/components/BEM?

With global styles (e.g. styles on `h1` tags), layout and utility classes, most of your styling problems will be solved. Those parts that are not yet solved can be solved with _blocks_. Compare it to the good old [BEM](http://getbem.com/introduction/). In modern frameworks they often corresponding one-on-one with UI components (e.g. a React component).

> From the [CUBE CSS](https://cube.fyi/block.html) documentation: "A block is a skeletal component or organisational structure. To compare it to common user interface elements: it is a card element or a button element."

Blocks and child classes in blocks (e.g. `.card .image`) have a higher specificity compared to layout and utilities classes. Blocks will overwrite CSS properties. It is therefore advised to only apply styles not covered in utility classes, to avoid confusion.

As blocks tend to be very project/application/system specific, _Bace CSS_ encourages you to write them yourself! _Bace CSS_ can easily be combined with your own CSS. You can use all the CSS custom properties generated by _Bace CSS_ in your blocks.

## What does Bace CSS stand for?

_Bace CSS_ stands for the idea to work from a single _base_ methodology, and build fluid UIs based on basic values (`$bace-sizes` and its fluid scaling). The name is derived from the color code `#11BACE`, which is used as the primary color as well.
